[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Angeles Arrien is an
anthropologist and workshop
leader from California who
brings the unique perspective
of her Basque ancestors to
the formulation of a new
discipline, which I would
call neoshamanic anthropology.
So there you have it, as
the king said to Mozart.
>> Yes.
Yes, as the caterpillar on
top of the mushroom said,
who are you?
>> Well, so I can looked
over your newsletter.
And it looks like
sort of neoshamanism
is the category that you are now
defining in your public talks.
Is that right?
>> Yeah.
I'm doing a lot of that,
but mostly universals,
what we all have
in common, finding
those basic roots,
which than take us
back to indigenous cultures.
>> Archetypes?
>> Archetypes.
>> Uh huh.
>> Especially the archetype
of the warrior and the healer
and the teacher
and the visionary.
Those are the four that the
shamanic or indigenous cultures
really focus upon.
>> Well, so you're genuinely in
the mainstream of the archaic
revival.
>> I never thought about
it that way, Terence.
>> Well, actually, it's sort
of subliminally plugged in one
of my blocks, which is
called "The Archaic Revival."
But the notion is that what
this whole cultural thrust
of the 20th century, and
especially in the last 30 years
will ultimately be
understood to be about
is a return to
aboriginal models.
And that means especially
shamanism and, to my mind,
especially
psychedelic shamanism.
>> Yes.
Yes.
Both.
>> But you know, the Renaissance
went through a rebirth
of classicism, probably without
ever really articulating that
that's what was happening.
But I think this shamanic
or aboriginal, ecological,
feminine partnership impulse
is now pretty explicit.
So that's what i mean.
>> Yeah, well, I think that--
I love the title like
"Archaic Revival,"
because at the same
time, what's coming up
is everyone talking
about a new world order.
And yet in order to understand
what constitutes a new world
order, we need to take a look
at what the current world
order is.
And so we really have,
essentially, four worlds.
We have the industrialized,
First World.
And we have the
socialist bloc, which
would be the Second World.
And we have the Third
World countries,
which are really the developing
countries, like Brazil.
But the fourth world is really
the aboriginal, indigenous
cultures that are
within cultures,
but don't have the
same kind of rights.
And the first three
worlds say that the land
belongs to the people.
But the fourth world, says that
the people belong to the land.
And so that people
belonging to the land,
it's your archaic revival.
But it's getting back to nature.
And owning those roots
brings up that revival,
which is the shift
that we're going
to need to make in order
to do the new world order,
is to get people
back to the land.
>> Well, it's too bad that
there's no place in the world
where that aboriginal position
is in a governing position.
>> Starting for the first time
in the last three years is
the establishment of the
World Indigenous Council.
And this summer, in
July, is the first time
that there will
actually be a vote
to have a seat on
the United Nations,
where there will
be representatives
from each of the world
indigenous peoples.
And so I'm real
hopeful about that.
>> You mean, every Amazonian
tribe could potentially have
a delegate--
>> Yes.
Or that they themselves could
have a council and vote who
would be their best
representatives as a bioregion.
>> Well, you know,
it always, the--
there's some phrase in Latin.
I can't remember
what it is, but it
means that he who does
not expand his borders,
will have his land
taken by somebody else.
And this was the theory
that drove colonization
in South America.
All of these
countries, like Peru,
Colombia, Ecuador,
Venezuela actually
encroach on a fast aboriginal
core in and of that continent,
which should be self-governing.
>> Yeah.
>> And were it self-governing,
would be tremendous.
>> Huge force.
>> Yeah.
It's amazing that I really think
that, for the last 20 years,
there's been this whole
East-West bridging.
But we're really starting
in the last five years
to this North-South
kind of bridging.
And I really feel that the Latin
American countries, which there
are 12 plus the indigenous
forest countries that
in the northern forest
would be Europe, Russia,
Canada, but the
whole southern force
is like Africa, Asia, and
the Latin American countries.
So that whole
force and those two
forces really coming together.
>> So even though you're
a spiritual teacher,
you talk global politics.
>> I do.
>> Like at State
Department, second string.
>> I do.
I do.
Well, I'm really excited
because that the grandparents
of the planet are like--
>> Your coffee.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Thank you.
>> Marvelous.
>> I just think your ideas about
your experiences in the Amazon
with psychotic brothers and
your work with the magician
in the tarot and the
up and the below.
It's-- I'm just--
I'll be back.
>> How about a little cream?
Yes.
>> I was thinking about the
grandparents of the planet
being the old Asian cultures
and all the Pacific Rim.
And then, the
exciting thing that's
happening in Europe for the
first time in history, that 11
countries are coming together
to form a European coalition
that it puts the child of the
planet, which is like America
or the United States,
which is so based on a hero
myth or a heroine myth
and fierce independence,
that the call in
the next 50 years
is for Americans to
learn about community.
Which indigenous societies and
the grandparents of the planet,
the old Asian cultures, and
now the parents of the planet,
really modeling teamwork and
collaboration and community,
is that America is going
to need to really learn
about collaboration and
community and cooperation.
And in order to do
that, then there's
going to need to be
the going back to what
would be the archaic
revival, or that beginning
to shift, so that there
can be a new world order,
where that fourth
world is addressed.
>> Well, don't you think sort of
what's happening is that people
have a very strong local
sense of place, loyalty?
>> It's true.
>> And then, they are
forming a planetary loyalty,
but in a way, all the levels
in between are dissolving.
So people don't think of
themselves as Americans.
They think of themselves
as northern Californians
and earthlings,
sort of like that.
But in a way,
federal Europe, which
is no longer a sure
thing, you know,
begins with these
recent developments.
It goes against that.
I sort of think maybe
McLuhan was right
and that there is
going to be a kind
of electronic feudalization,
where many more
small states will emerge.
And the recent death
throe for the nation state
appears to be
slowly disappearing.
And the states, I think the
crisis that came to Marxism
is coming now for the republic
craft oligarchy in America.
>> Yeah.
I think you're right.
I think there's a terrific
shift of power that's
going on, that out of maybe the
hierarchical types of power,
to people power.
And I see two major
forces contributing
to that, which is one of the
computer or the electronic,
because it's people,
peopled-based,
individual based, bringing the
power back to the individual.
And also free enterprise, rather
than capitalism or communism.
There's that middle
road coming in.
So I think that when we take
a look, cross-culturally,
at the three kinds of power
or the power of presence
or the power of communication
or the power position,
the willingness to
take a stand, is
that it's going to be
very important to see how
those shifts of power
really are going back
to empowerment of the people.
>> Well, don't you think that's
why meeting in Prague was
a great choice, because
these people managed to make
a bloodless revolution?
>> That's right.
>> A velvet brick through.
>> Yeah.
I love that.
>> Of course.
>> Velvet brick.
>> They weren't composed of a
population of two 220 million
meatheads either.
>> Did you want cream?
>> Yes.
A little cream for the--
thank you.
Resourceful little weasel.
>> So I'm delighted that your
works are coming out this year
and next year.
>> Well, probably not
half as delighted as I am.
It certainly takes a long
time to get this stuff out.
But in my case, they
ignored me for 25 years.
So when they finally decided
I was maybe a good marketing
risk, they bought everything.
>> That's so wonderful.
I can remember when the first
set of packaging of six tapes--
remember when those
first came out?
And it's wonderful to see
when the timing is right,
how the shifts take place
and the needed knowledge
is really highlighted
to come to the forehead.
>> Yeah.
Well, timing and persistence
and positioning is everything,
I think.
If you're the person
who's always shows up,
sooner or later,
you get to the top.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
It's wonderful.
It's also diligence.
I mean, you've
really been diligent
to your original vision,
which has been wonderful.
>> Well, you've been
at it for a while too.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
We have both have.
>> And done very well.
>> Thank you.
Thank you.
>> So what are you
looking toward the future,
personally and globally?
>> I've been doing all that
a lot with taking a look
at what's found that's
similar in all art, globally,
because I feel that what
humanity consistently creates
in art is really reinforcing
deep spiritual processes.
And so what I've
found is that there
are five shapes that are
found consistently in all art
globally.
And one is the circle.
The other is the cross,
like the plus sign,
the equidistant cross.
And the triangle and the
square and the spiral.
And you can see it see
them all here in Prague,
everywhere you look, I
mean, in all the decor
are those shapes repeated
over and over and over again.
So I begin to look
cross-culturally to see
if cultures attributed the
same meaning to those shapes
and found that 92%
of all the cultures
that tribute the same
meaning to the circle, which
is the process of individuation
or to the cross, relatedness,
and interconnection
and interface.
And the square, stability
and foundation setting.
And the--
>> So does this imply a genetic
syntax of form or something
like that?
>> I think that it's part
of the archaic revival,
in that there would be a deeply
cellular imprinting of some
kind.
>> Well, that's what
I mean by genetic.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I really do.
>> Or the triangle being
the visionary or searching,
seeking, questing
process or planning,
dreaming process and
the spiral being,
the need for variety or the
need for change or growth
and evolution.
So it's been really wonderful.
It's part of a new
book that's coming out
called "Signs of Life," and
showing how those images come
up in all of the
continents and are also
found in literature, poetry,
and put all that together in one
place.
>> So do you spend much time
thinking about the future?
>> I do.
I do.
>> What's your take on it?
>> I think that it's
exciting for me to think that
we're being called in the next
50 years to our own creative
fire, that we all
have salvation myths.
And we all have doomsday
myths, but there's
a whole body of myths
in mythology that
have been totally overlooked,
that I think we're being called
to, which are creation myths.
And what are the creation
myths, but stories
about how to build new worlds,
internally and externally?
And I think that
for 2,000 years,
we've done the polarity dance.
And we're moving
into a both and world
rather than an either or world.
And I'm excited about the
future that if we can really
move into the wisdom
of the plant kingdom
and if we can move into
the deep wisdom of nature
as a mirror of our own nature
and remember our creative fire,
I think it will be a
wonderful time in history.
I'm so glad I was
born at the time I
was born to be a part of this
evolutionary Renaissance.
>> How do you see it happening?
I mean, do you see a
breakthrough with technology
or an abandonment of technology?
Do you see pharmacological
engineering?
Do you see new religions?
In other words, it's easy
to hope, but very hard
to get the details in focus.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
I think that what I
see is that there'll
be both the bridging of the
natural and the technological.
>> So a more
cellular technology?
>> Yes.
>> A more organic
infrastructure.
>> Sure.
And I think that
computers are here
to teach us about those
organic structures.
I think that we're learning
different kinds of systems
to really see what are the
inherent systems within nature
and within our own nature.
>> So to the degree that
we can mirror nature,
we can respiritualize,
rehumanize technology
and interpersonal relations.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
Which would be wonderful.
>> Well, I come right
down the line on that.
I mean, to me, psychedelics are
just simply the best catalyst.
But anything which works
should be pushed to the limit.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
And I know I was just thinking
that, somehow, we've got
to think about possibilities.
I was thinking about in
the Rosicrucian era, which
is very close here to Prague
is that they would often
say you can count the
seeds in an apple,
but you can't count
the apples in a seed.
And I think we're moving in
that era of where we've really
think of the
possibilities in the seeds
that we have been planting,
or the fact that computers are
teaching us about instant
feedback or instant response
and acknowledgment and that
the power of acknowledgment
and feedback to allow
organisms to grow.
And that's why children
are, in many ways,
know that instinctively
that they're
mesmerized by that they
can get a yes or no are
go back or fatal error
or whatever it might be.
>> Well, it's a kind of
explicit hard wiring of our own
unconscious.
No more do we create
cultural artifacts
that are simply our furniture.
But now, our
thoughts, our values,
are embodies in this stuff.
Yeah.
>> It's exciting.
>> It's very exciting.
>> It really is.
>> I envision a future world
where people are nomadic,
aboriginal, physically perfect,
living basically naked.
But if you were inside one
of these people's minds,
you would see that when
they close their eyes,
there are menus hanging in
space, that the culture has
been shrunk down to something
rather like a contact
lens, which is in the
forefront of their eyelid.
And they look into culture
by closing their eyes.
And when they open their
eyes, nature in her radiance
is all around.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]